#summary Module network bibliography.

A collection of module network papers listed in chronological order with Lemon-Tree project members in bold. Let us know if we have overlooked any relevant publications!

===New Methods===

Papers in this section introduced new module network methods and algorithms, along with various degrees of biological validation.

  * Segal E, Shapira M, Regev A, Pe’er D, Botstein D, et al.(2003) [http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v34/n2/abs/ng1165.html Module networks: identifying regulatory modules and their condition-specific regulators from gene expression data]. Nature Genetics 34: 166–167.

  * Lee S, Pe’er D, Dudley A, Church G, Koller D (2006) [http://www.pnas.org/content/103/38/14062.short Identifying regulatory mechanisms using individual variation reveals key role for chromatin modification]. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103: 14062–14067.

  * *Michoel T*, Maere S, *Bonnet E*, Joshi A, Saeys Y, et al. (2007) [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S2/S5 Validating module networks learning algorithms using simulated data]. BMC Bioinformatics 8: S5.

  * Joshi A, Van de Peer Y, *Michoel T* (2008) [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/24/2/176.long Analysis of a Gibbs sampler for model based clustering of gene expression data]. Bioinformatics 24: 176–183.

 * Joshi A, De Smet R, Marchal K,Van de Peer Y, *Michoel T*( 2009) [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/25/4/490.long Module networks revisited: computational assessment and prioritization of model predictions]. Bioinformatics 25: 490- 496.

  * *Michoel T*, De Smet R, Joshi A, Van de Peer Y, Marchal K (2009) [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/3/49 Comparative analysis of module-based versus direct methods for reverse-engineering transcriptional regulatory networks]. BMC Syst Biol 3: 49.

 * Lee SI, Dudley AM, Drubin D, Silver PA, Krogan NJ, et al. (2009) [http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000358.g008 Learning a prior on regulatory potential from eQTL data]. PLoS Genetics 5: e1000358.

  * *Bonnet E*, Tatari M, Joshi A, *Michoel T*, Marchal K, et al. (2010) [http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0010162 Module network inference from a cancer gene expression data set identifies microRNA regulated modules]. PLoS One 5: e10162.

  * *Bonnet E*, *Michoel T*, Van de Peer Y (2010) [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/26/18/i638 Prediction of a gene regulatory network linked to prostate cancer from gene expression, microRNA and clinical data]. Bioinformatics 26: i683–i644.

  * Zhang W, Zhu J, Schadt EE, Liu JS (2010) [http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000642.g006 A Bayesian partition method for detecting pleiotropic and epistatic eQTL modules]. PLoS Computational Biology 6: e1000642.

  * Akavia UD, Litvin O, Kim J, Sanchez-Garcia F, Kotliar D, et al. (2010) [http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867410012936 An integrated approach to uncover drivers of cancer]. Cell 143: 1005–1017.

  * Novershtern N, Regev A, Friedman N (2011) [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/13/i177.short Physical module networks: an integrative approach for reconstructing transcription regulation]. Bioinformatics 27: i177–i185.

  * Novershtern N, Subramanian A, Lawton LN, Mak RH, Haining WN, et al. (2011) [http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867411000055 Densely interconnected transcriptional circuits control cell states in human hematopoiesis]. Cell 144: 296–309.

  * Roy S, Lagree S, Hou Z, Thomson JA, Stewart R, et al. (2013) [http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003252 Integrated module and gene-specific regulatory inference implicates upstream signaling networks]. PLoS Computational Biology 9.

  * Roy S, Wapinski I, Pfiffner J, French C, Socha A,et al. (2013) [http://genome.cshlp.org/content/23/6/1039.short Arboretum: reconstruction and analysis of the evolutionary history of condition-specific transcriptional modules]. Genome Research 23: 1039–1050.

===Applications===

Papers in this section applied existing module network methods to concrete biological and biomedical problems.

 * Segal E, Sirlin CB, Ooi C, Adler AS, Gollub J, et al. (2007) [http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v25/n6/abs/nbt1306.html Decoding global gene expression programs in liver cancer by noninvasive imaging]. Nat Biotech 25: 675–680.

  * Zhu H, Yang H, Owen MR (2007) [http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11693-008-9015-2 Combined microarray analysis uncovers self-renewal related signaling in mouse embryonic stem cells]. Syst Synth Biol 1: 171–181.

  * Li J, Liu Z, Pan Y, Liu Q, Fu X, et al. (2007) [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1465-6906/8/R244 Regulatory module network of basic/helix-loop-helix transcription factors in mouse brain]. Genome Biol 8: R 244.

  * Novershtern N, Itzhaki Z, Manor O, Friedman N, Kaminski N (2008) [http://www.atsjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1165/rcmb.2007-0151OC A functional and regulatory map of asthma]. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 38: 324–336.

 * Amit I, Garber M, Chevrier N, Leite AP, Donner Y, et al. (2009) [http://www.sciencemag.org/content/326/5950/257.short Unbiased reconstruction of a mammalian transcriptional network mediating pathogen responses]. Science 326: 257.

  * Vermeirssen V, Joshi A, *Michoel T*, *Bonnet E*, Casneuf T, et al. (2009) [http://pubs.rsc.org/en/Content/ArticleLanding/2009/MB/b908108a Transcription regulatory networks in Caenorhabditis elegans inferred through reverse-engineering of gene expression profiles constitute biological hypotheses for metazoan development]. Mol Bio Syst 5: 1817–1830.

  * Zhu M, Deng X, Joshi T, Xu D, Stacey G, et al. (2012) [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/13/437 Reconstructing differentially co-expressed gene modules and regulatory networks of soybean cells]. BMC Genomics 13: 437.

  * Benitez C.M., et al. (2014). [http://www.plosgenetics.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pgen.1004645 An Integrated Cell Purification and Genomics Strategy Reveals Multiple Regulators of Pancreas Development]. PLOS Genetics, 10(10), e1004645. 

 * Kogelman, L. J., et al. [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/7/57 Identification of co-expression gene networks, regulatory genes and pathways for obesity based on adipose tissue RNA Sequencing in a porcine model]. BMC Medical Genomics 7.1 (2014): 57.