#summary All the default parameters for the different Lemon-Tree tasks.

== ganesh task ==


||Parameter|| Default value || Description ||
||lambda || 0.1 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||alpha || 0.1 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||beta || 0.1 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||mu || 0.0 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||init_num_clust || 1/2 nb of genes in data matrix || initial number of clusters||
||num_steps|| 100 || total nb of Gibbs sampling steps||
||burn_in|| 50 || nb of Gibbs sampling steps before storing the first clustering solution ||
||sample_steps|| 100 || nb of Gibbs sampling steps between storing successive clustering solutions||
|| score_gain|| 0.0 || Bayesian score difference for keeping two condition clusters as separate leaves in the decision tree vs. merging them||

  * For a detailed definition of the Bayesian score function and the normal-gamma prior, see eq. (1) in [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/24/2/176.long the Gibbs sampler paper].
  * One Gibbs sampler step is defined as performing (nb of genes) gene reassignment operations followed by (nb of conditions) condition reassignment operations for each current module.
  * The default settings mean that one clustering solution is stored at the end the Gibbs sampling procedure. 

== tight_clusters task ==

||Parameter|| Default value || Description ||
||node_clustering|| true || choose between node (true) or edge (false) clustering procedures to create the tight clusters||
|| min_weight || 0.25 || minimum weight for node or edge clustering procedure||
|| min_clust_size || 10 || minimal cluster size for node or edge clustering procedure||
|| min_clust_score || 2 || minimal cluster score for node or edge clustering procedure||

  * Detailed definitions of these parameters are provided in the Supplementary Methods of [http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.0472 the Lemon-Tree paper].

== regulators task ==

||Parameter|| Default value || Description ||
||lambda || 0.1 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||alpha || 0.1 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||beta || 0.1 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||mu || 0.0 || normal-gamma prior parameter||
||num_steps|| 1100 || total nb of Gibbs sampling steps||
||burn_in|| 100 || nb of Gibbs sampling steps before storing the first condition clustering solution||
||sample_steps|| 100 || nb of Gibbs sampling steps between storing successive condition clustering solutions||
|| score_gain|| 0.0 || Bayesian score difference for keeping two condition clusters as separate leaves in the decision tree vs. merging them||
|| num_reg|| 10 || Number of regulators sampled per leaf node||

  * The regulators task uses the same Gibbs sampling procedure as the ganesh task to sample condition clustering solutions for each module, but without reassigning genes, hence one Gibbs sampling step is defined here as performing (nb of conditions) condition reassignment operations for each module.
  * Regulators are sampled at each decision tree node according to a logistic regression model, see [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/25/4/490.long the module network inference paper].
  * The default settings mean that 10 condition clustering solutions and associated decision trees are sampled for each module, and 10 regulators are sampled at each decision tree node. 

== go_annotation task ==
||Parameter|| Default value || Description ||
||go_p_value || 0.05 || GO p-value cutoff level||
||go_namespace || biological_process|| default namespace for enrichment calculations||

  * For details, see [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/21/16/3448.short the BiNGO paper].

== figures task ==
||Parameter|| Default value || Description ||
||use_global_mean||false|| Use the global mean for the color gradient in the figures||
||use_regulator_mean||false || Use the regulator mean for the color gradient in the figures||
||cut_level|| 0 || Cut the regulation tree at a given depth for the figures (0 means no cutting)||

  * The default settings mean that the color gradient is defined separately for each module based on the mean expression level of genes in the module (as opposed to all genes in the data) and that the regulator panel uses the same color gradient as the module genes. When combining different types of regulator data, setting use_regulator_mean to true is recommended.